Hi. My name is Kevin Jones,
and this is the How Garbage Collection Works in the Oracle JVM
chapter from the Understanding the Java Virtual Machine: Memory
Management class from Pluralsight.
In the previous chapter,
we talked about generalities of using a garbage collector.
We now have to think about exactly how we are going to do this and
exactly what the requirements are for a garbage collector.
So there are many things to consider here.
So, for example, with a garbage collector,
we have what are called stop the world events. A stop the world event is
when the garbage collector pauses the entire application.
And at that point, it collects garbage.
We want to try and minimize these events.
We also might need to think about memory fragmentation.
So when the garbage collector runs,
does it defragment memory all at once. does it leave it to a later stage, or
does it just leave memory fragmented on the basis that leaving memory
fragmented has a cheaper cost than trying to defragment it?
We also have to think about the throughput of the garbage collector. How
quickly can it run, how quickly can it collect garbage, and does that
affect the behavior of your application? To achieve these things, there
are different garbage collectors inside the virtual machines. There are a
mixture of generational garbage collectors that do copying, that do mark
and sweep. Some leave memory fragmentation, some don't. And you have to
choose which one of these you'd like to use. And in this chapter, we'll
take a look at each these different types of garbage collectors that the
virtual machine has and how they can be used inside the VM.
One other thing to think about is if you're running on a multi‑core machine. So
now we have multiple processes, we have multiple threads.
Can we have a garbage collector that can run concurrently with our application?
Are you running parallel with the application? And will that
provide benefits to the application? And again, Java provides these types of garbage collectors as well.